what is learning
many people wonder what learning is is
it something that brains do is it
something that things like food exercise
and brain training can help with is it
something you need to do to pass tests
something that comes from studying
really hard to be good at things you
find boring
all of these are a little or a lot
misleading
brains are physical things like hearts
or lungs
but what brains do is very special and
not like what hearts or lungs do
what human brains do is create minds and
minds are not physical things
mines are very special things that
humans have
and that create ideas
are things we create for ourselves
we need to either produce ideas via a
creative process
or we need to learn ideas which also
happens to be via creative process
but although ideas run on neurons they
are not identical to neurons
they are just represented somehow
in ways we do not really at all
understand
in patterns of electrical activity in
neurons
but this isn't to say much at all
it's rather like saying
if you were to think that ideas were
nothing but neurons that the Mona Lisa
or some other famous painting
was made up of nothing but atoms
now it's true that the Mona Lisa is made
up of atoms but it's far more than this
and to analyze the Mona Lisa as a
painting in terms of the atoms that make
it up is to explain what's going on at
the wrong level
when we speak about the Mona Lisa we
don't talk about atoms we talk about
shade and tone
and that ambiguous smile
we never need to mention the atoms
and so it is with learning
although the physical brain is necessary
for learning
we don't need to confuse
brain activity with the activity of the
Mind
we don't need to confuse physical atoms
with what's really going on
so to explain learning we need to get
beyond the brain and into the mind
so learning is not really a physical
thing like pumping blood or breathing
air
learning is an abstract process of
creating and criticizing guesses about
the world around us
that's right
what our minds do is guess what is
correct or what might work and then we
as our minds criticize that guess
this is all that learning ever is it is
in short guess and check
all the time
when we learn something new we are
creating in our own minds that idea for
the first time
if the idea is one that works or that we
guess is true we keep it
how do we know that it works or that it
is true
we criticize it we hold it up to the
light so to speak
and take more or less a careful look
depending upon the circumstances
and if it survives every criticism we
have at the time
then we accept it always conditionally
of course but accept that we do and when
we accept it we say we know it
now sometimes we take extra care to be
critical of new ideas
and even old ones
this is what critical thinking is about
it's all about checking to see if there
are problems with ideas
and so good learning requires extra good
critical thinking
it requires us to be critical in the
true sense of the word
to bring criticism to Bear even against
our most cherished assumptions
the better we become at this the faster
we can learn
because we discard the ideas that don't
work
those that are false and not allowing us
to make progress
and replace them
with thoughts that work and that are
true
so learning is about creating knowledge
in your own mind
it requires a person to attempt an
answer
or a project or some other activity like
playing the piano or doing gymnastics or
solving a chemical equation and testing
that idea in the real world
testing is another word for criticizing
if an idea fails the test that's a
criticism if it makes it through we
retain it
for now at least
now in all of this error is necessarily
part of the process
we simply have to make mistakes when we
are learning
we have to find out where we have gone
wrong
and we have to go wrong because we're
fallible human beings
this means we can't possibly get things
consistently correct all of the time
so that's what learning is
learning is creating knowledge in your
mind by a process of creativity or
guessing and criticism
both parts of the learning process are
absolutely crucial
and the better we can get at both parts
being critical and being creative the
faster we can learn and the deeper our
understanding can become
so we should keep in mind a deep
epistemological truth
learning is supported on two grand
pillars
one is creativity
and the other is critical thinking
to maximize learning we need to maximize
both
and how to do that
well that's a topic for another time